URL: https://realpython.com/learning-paths/python-concurrency-parallel-programming/
Title: Python Concurrency and Parallel Programming

Concurrency and Async Programming (Learning Path) – Real Python Concurrency and Async Programming Learning Path ⋅ Skills: Python, Concurrency, Async IO, Global Interpreter Lock, Thread Safety, Parallel Processing, Performance Optimization, Multithreading, Code Efficiency Unlock Python’s full potential with our concurrency and async programming path. Explore concurrency techniques, the Global Interpreter Lock, async IO, thread safety, and parallel processing to boost your program’s performance. Concurrency and Async Programming Learning Path ⋅ 10 Resources Understanding Python Concurrency Before diving deep, get an overview of what concurrency means in Python. You’ll learn about the different approaches to running code concurrently and when to use each one. #1 Course Speed Up Python With Concurrency Learn what concurrency means in Python and why you might want to use it. You'll see a simple, non-concurrent approach and then look into why you'd want threading, asyncio, or multiprocessing. Interactive Quiz Python Concurrency The Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) The GIL is a fundamental part of CPython that affects how your concurrent code runs. Understanding the GIL is key to writing efficient Python programs. #2 Course Understanding Python's Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) Python's Global Interpreter Lock or GIL, in simple words, is a mutex (or a lock) that allows only one thread to hold the control of the Python interpreter at any one time. In this video course you'll learn how the GIL affects the performance of your Python programs. Interactive Quiz What Is the Python Global Interpreter Lock (GIL)? Working With Threads Threads let you run multiple operations concurrently within a single process. Learn how to use Python’s threading module effectively and safely. #3 Course Threading in Python In this intermediate-level course, you'll learn how to use threading in your Python programs. You'll see how to create threads, how to coordinate and synchronize them, and how to handle common problems that arise in threading. Interactive Quiz Python Threading #4 Course Thread Safety in Python: Locks and Other Techniques Learn about the issues that can occur when your code is run in a multithreaded environment. Then you'll explore the various synchronization primitives available in Python's threading module, such as locks, which help you make your code safe. Interactive Quiz Python Thread Safety: Using a Lock and Other Techniques Podcast Python Thread Safety & Managing Projects With uv Asynchronous Programming With asyncio Async programming is a powerful paradigm for I/O-bound tasks. Learn how to use Python’s async/await syntax and the asyncio module to write efficient asynchronous code. #5 Tutorial Getting Started With Async Features in Python This step-by-step tutorial gives you the tools you need to start making asynchronous programming techniques a part of your repertoire. You'll learn how to use Python async features to take advantage of IO processes and free up your CPU. Interactive Quiz Getting Started With Async Features in Python #6 Course Hands-On Python 3 Concurrency With the asyncio Module Learn how to speed up your Python 3 programs using concurrency and the asyncio module in the standard library. See step-by-step how to leverage concurrency and parallelism in your own programs, all the way to building a complete HTTP downloader example app using asyncio and aiohttp. Interactive Quiz Python's asyncio: A Hands-On Walkthrough #7 Course Exploring Asynchronous Iterators and Iterables Learn to build async iterators and iterables in Python to handle async operations efficiently and write cleaner, faster code. Interactive Quiz Asynchronous Iterators and Iterables in Python Going Beyond the GIL For CPU-bound tasks, you’ll need to bypass the GIL. Learn about parallel processing techniques and Python 3.13’s new free-threading capabilities. #8 Tutorial Bypassing the GIL for Parallel Processing in Python In this tutorial, you'll take a deep dive into parallel processing in Python. You'll learn about a few traditional and several novel ways of sidestepping the global interpreter lock (GIL) to achieve genuine shared-memory parallelism of your CPU-bound tasks. #9 Tutorial Python 3.13: Free Threading and a JIT Compiler Python 3.13 enhanced Python performance. Make a custom Python build with Docker to enable free threading and a JIT compiler. Learn how these features affect the language's ecosystem. Interactive Quiz Python 3.13: Free Threading and a JIT Compiler Podcast The Joy of Tinkering & Python Free-Threading Performance Test Your Knowledge You’ve made it through the entire path! In the wrap-up quiz below, you’ll revisit the most important ideas about Python concurrency, the GIL, threading, thread safety, asyncio , async iterators, and free-threaded Python 3.13. Use it to spot any topics that still feel rusty before moving on. #10 Interactive Quiz Concurrency and Async Programming Test your understanding of Python concurrency, the GIL, threading, thread safety, asyncio, async iterators, and free-threaded Python 3.13. Congratulations on completing this learning path! You’ve learned how Python handles concurrency, from the fundamentals through threading, async programming, and strategies for bypassing the GIL. Continue your advanced Python journey with the next learning path: Learning Path Database Access With Python 9 Resources ⋅ Skills: SQL Libraries, SQLite, SQLAlchemy, Redis, MySQL, MongoDB, ChromaDB, Data Management, NoSQL Databases, Vector Databases, DuckDB, TinyDB, SQL Security You might also be interested in these related learning paths: DevOps With Python Network Programming and Security Got feedback on this learning path? Looking for real-time conversation? Visit the Real Python Community Chat or join the next “Office Hours” Live Q&A Session . Happy Pythoning! « Browse All Learning Paths Free Bonus: Python Cheat Sheet Get a Python Cheat Sheet (PDF) and learn the basics of Python, like working with data types, dictionaries, lists, and Python functions: