URL: https://www.apa.org/news/press/releases/2014/04/creativity-walk
Title: Taking a walk may lead to more creativity than sitting, study finds

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.
Cookies Settings Reject All Accept All Cookies
skip to main content

Turn insight into action at APA 2026, August 6–8, in Washington, DC, and virtual. Register now.

APA.org
APA Style
APA Services
Corporate Solutions
Divisions
About APA
Events
Membership
Join APA
Log In
Cart
(0)
TOPICS
PUBLICATIONS & DATABASES
RESEARCH & PRACTICE
EDUCATION & CAREER
NEWS & ADVOCACY

This page has been archived and is no longer being updated regularly.

Home News & advocacy Press room Press releases 2014
Date created: April 24, 2014
Taking a Walk May Lead to More Creativity than Sitting, Study Finds
Exercise and Fitness
Creativity and Innovation
Sport and Rehabilitation

Free-flowing thought more likely while walking indoors or outdoors, research reveals

Give Your Ideas Some Legs (PDF, 144KB)
opens in new window

WASHINGTON — When the task at hand requires some imagination, taking a walk may lead to more creative thinking than sitting, according to research published by the American Psychological Association.

“Many people anecdotally claim they do their best thinking when walking,” said Marily Oppezzo, PhD, of Santa Clara University. “With this study, we finally may be taking a step or two toward discovering why.” 

While at Stanford University’s Graduate School of Education, Oppezzo and colleague Daniel L. Schwartz, PhD, conducted studies involving 176 people, mostly college students. They found that those who walked instead of sitting or being pushed in a wheelchair consistently gave more creative responses on tests commonly used to measure creative thinking, such as thinking of alternate uses for common objects and coming up with original analogies to capture complex ideas. When asked to solve problems with a single answer, however, the walkers fell slightly behind those who responded while sitting, according to the study published in APA’s Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition®.

While previous research has shown that regular aerobic exercise may protect cognitive abilities, these researchers examined whether simply walking could temporarily improve some types of thinking, such as free-flowing thought compared to focused concentration. “Asking someone to take a 30-minute run to improve creativity at work would be an unpopular prescription for many people,” Schwartz said. “We wanted to see if a simple walk might lead to more free-flowing thoughts and more creativity.” 

Of the students tested for creativity while walking, 100 percent came up with more creative ideas in one experiment, while 95 percent, 88 percent and 81 percent of the walker groups in the other experiments had more creative responses compared with when they were sitting. If a response was unique among all responses from the group, it was considered novel. Researchers also gauged a participant’s total number of responses and whether a response was feasible and appropriate to the constraints of the task. For example, “Putting lighter fluid in soup is novel, but it is not very appropriate,” Oppezzo said.

In one experiment with 48 participants, each student sat alone in a small room at a desk facing a blank wall. When a researcher named an object, the student came up with alternative ways to use the object. For example, for the word “button,” a person might say “as a doorknob on a dollhouse.” The students heard two sets of three words and had four minutes per set to come up with as many responses as possible. To see how walking might affect more restricted thinking, the researchers also had the students complete a word association task with 15 three-word groups, such as “cottage—Swiss—cake,” for which the correct answer is “cheese.” Participants repeated both tasks with different sets of words first while sitting and then while walking at a comfortable pace on a treadmill facing a blank wall in the same room. 

With a different group of 48 students, some sat for two different sets of the tests, some walked during two sets of the test and some walked and then sat for the tests. “This confirmed that the effect of walking during the second test set was not due to practice,” Oppezzo said. “Participants came up with fewer novel ideas when they sat for the second test set after walking during the first. However, they did perform better than the participants who sat for both sets of tests, so there was a residual effect of walking on creativity when people sat down afterward. Walking before a meeting that requires innovation may still be nearly as useful as walking during the meeting.” 

Students who walked in another experiment doubled their number of novel responses compared with when they were sitting. The 40 students in this experiment were divided into three groups: One sat for two sets of tests but moved to separate rooms for each set; another sat and then walked on a treadmill; and one group walked outdoors along a predetermined path. 

To see if walking was the source of creative inspiration rather than being outdoors, another experiment with 40 participants compared responses of students walking outside or inside on a treadmill with the responses of students being pushed in a wheelchair outside and sitting inside. Again, the students who walked, whether indoors or outside, came up with more creative responses than those either sitting inside or being pushed in a wheelchair outdoors. “While being outdoors has many cognitive benefits, walking appears to have a very specific benefit of improving creativity,” said Oppezzo. 

More research will be necessary to explain how walking improves creativity, the authors said. They speculated that future studies would likely determine a complex pathway that extends from the physical act of walking to physiological changes to the cognitive control of imagination. “Incorporating physical activity into our lives is not only beneficial for our hearts but our brains as well. This research suggests an easy and productive way to weave it into certain work activities,” Oppezzo said.

Funding for the study was provided by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation, the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation and a Stanford Graduate School of Education Dissertation Support Grant.

Article:  “Give Your Ideas Some Legs: The Positive Effect of Walking on Creative Thinking,” Marily Oppezzo, PhD, Santa Clara University, and Daniel L. Schwartz, PhD, Stanford University, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, published online April 2014.

Marily Oppezzo can be contacted by email
opens in new window
 or by phone at (408) 314-2629.

The American Psychological Association, in Washington, D.C., is the largest scientific and professional organization representing psychology in the United States. APA's membership includes nearly 130,000 researchers, educators, clinicians, consultants and students. Through its divisions in 54 subfields of psychology and affiliations with 60 state, territorial and Canadian provincial associations, APA works to advance the creation, communication and application of psychological knowledge to benefit society and improve people's lives.

The content I just read:
 IS HELPFUL  IS NOT HELPFUL
Contact

Public Affairs

(202) 336-5700

Advancing psychology to benefit society and improve lives
ABOUT PSYCHOLOGY
Science of Psychology
Psychology Topics


STUDENTS
Accredited Psychology Programs
Careers in Psychology
More for Students
PUBLICATIONS & DATABASES
APA Style
Books
Children's Books
Databases
DVD/Streaming Video
Journal Subscriptions
APA PsycNet® Journal Articles
More Publications & Databases
NEWS & ADVOCACY
Monitor on Psychology Magazine
Newsletters
Press Room
Advocacy from APA Services, Inc.
 
STANDARDS & GUIDELINES
Standards and Guidelines
Ethics
CAREERS
Find a Job with PsycCareers
Early Career Psychologists
 
EVENTS & TRAINING
APA Annual Convention
Continuing Education
Events Calendar
Training
ABOUT APA
Governance
APA Divisions
Teams and Offices
Jobs at APA
Corporate Supporters
Become a Partner
Advertise with Us
Help
Donate
APA Merch Store
Refund Policy
Contact Us
MEMBERS
APA Community
Get Involved
Membership Benefits
More for Members
RENEW MEMBERSHIP
JOIN APA
Cookies
Privacy Statement
Terms of Use
Accessibility
Website Feedback
Sitemap
FOLLOW APA
MORE

© 2026 American Psychological Association
750 First St. NE, Washington, DC 20002-4242
Telephone: (800) 374-2721; (202) 336-5500 | TDD/TTY: (202) 336-6123